اَلْحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ العَالَمِينْ وَالصَّلاةُ والسَّلامُ على سَيِّدِ الْمُرْسلِينْ اَمَّا بعد فَاعُوذُ بِلّٰهِ من الشَيْطانِ الرَّجِيمْ بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمانِ الرَّحِيمْ

One Hundred Needs will be fulfilled:
The Beloved and Blessed Prophet صلى الله تعالى عليه وسلم has said, 'One who recites Ṣalāt upon me on the day and night of Friday, Allah عَزَّوَجَلْ will fulfill his 100 needs; 70 of the Hereafter and 30 of the world, and Allah عَزَّوَجَلْ will appoint an angel who will convey the Ṣalāt to my grave in such a way as gifts are presented to you. No doubt, even after I depart this life, my knowledge will remain the same as it is in my life.'

صَلُّوۡا عَلَى الۡحَبِيۡب صَلَّى اللّٰهُ تَعَالٰى عَلٰى مُحَمَّد

الحمد لله عَزَّوَجَلْ!  I (Sag-e-Madinah) came to know about Imām-e-Aĥl-e-Sunnat Shāĥ Imām Aḥmad Razā Khān عليه رحمة الرحمن in my childhood. As I grew up, the devotion towards Aala Ḥaḍrat رحمة الله تعالى عليه inculcated in my heart. I fearlessly say لَوْمةَ لَاءِمْ, (that is, without fearing for the reproach of anyone) that I have recognized Allah عَزَّوَجَلْ through the Beloved Prophet صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَسَلَّم, and similarly I did recognize the Beloved Prophet صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَسَلَّم through Aala Ḥaḍratرحمة الله تعالى عليه. When I felt an overwhelming desire to join his spiritual-lineage, only one eminent personality became the focus of my attention. However, there was no shortage of Mashāikh Aĥl-e-Sunnat at that time and not even today, but it is a matter of personal choice. I knew that I could become a direct Murīd of Aala Ḥaḍrat رحمة الله تعالى عليه through one medium only by that sacred personality. And his charismatic personality also had another attraction that he رحمة الله تعالى عليه was receiving direct blessings from the shade of Gumbad-e-Khazrā [that is, he رحمة الله تعالى عليه had the privilege of residing in the blessed city of Madinah].

The dignified personality I am talking about is ‘Allāmaĥ Maulānā Ziyāuddīn Madanī Qādirī Razavī رحمة الله تعالى عليه. I made a firm intention to become his Murīd (disciple) at any cost. Therefore, somehow I obtained his home address in Madīnaĥ Munawwaraĥ probably in the year 1396 AH (i.e., 1976).

After I had found the address, I told one of my considerate fellows 'late Muhammad Adam Barkati' that I had decided to pledge spiritual bond (Bay’at) via Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رحمة الله تعالى عليه by postal mail. Brother Adam (Late) said, 'You live in Karachi and he is in Madīnaĥ. You have not seen him yet. How would you form the image of Shaikh?' I replied, 'It is not a difficult thing to do. If he is a genuine spiritual guide, he can solve this problem through a dream; apparent distance cannot become an obstacle against blessings and favours.'

The same night (10 Rabī’-un-Nūr) when I fell asleep, fortune smiled on me and by the grace of Allah عَزَّوَجَلَّ, in fact, I saw my future spiritual guide in my dream, and he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه appeared in full glory as long as I saved his image in my mind properly; اَلْـحَمْـدُ لـِلّٰـه عَزَّوَجَلَّ, the same image is still safe in my mind today. I happily went to the caliph of Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ Al-Ḥāj ‘Allāmaĥ Maulānā Ḥāfiẓ Qārī Muhammad Muṣliḥuddīn Ṣiddīqī Al-Qādirī عَـلَيْهِ رَحْـمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ الۡـقَـوِی and told him my dream. He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه enquired about the appearance of Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه. I related whatever I dreamt, he verified it as Qārī Sahib had visited Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه many a time in Madīnaĥ Munawwaraĥ. Then I had a letter written from Qārī Sahib for pledging allegiance (Bay’at) and sent it to Madīnaĥ from Karachi, but did not receive any reply. I sent the same type of letter few more times but received no reply. I was not amongst those who would give up.

Eventually, fortune smiled on me after one year and five days, I saw him in my dream. I was astounded at this matter that neither he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه accepted me as his Murīd nor did he   رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه divert his attention away from me. But I did not know that the waiting time had been over. I saw him in my dream that night then the next day after Ṣalāt-ul-Maghrib I learnt that a letter of acceptance from my spiritual guide living in sacred city Madīnaĥ has arrived اَلۡحَمۡدُلِلّٰهِ عَلٰي اِحۡسَانِه.

Then in 1400 AH, by the blessings and favours of the Beloved and Blessed Prophet صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم, I landed at Jeddah airport and reached Madīnaĥ Munawwaraĥ along with my Pīr brother (follower of the same spiritual guide) Sākin-e-Madīnaĥ (residing in Madīnaĥ) Al-Ḥāj Ṣūfī Muhammad Iqbāl Qādirī Razavī Ziyāī by car. Having paid Salām in the blessed court of the Beloved Prophet صَلَّى الـلّٰـهُ تَـعَالٰى عَـلَيْهِ وَاٰلـِهٖ وَسَـلَّم, I visited the blessed residence of my spiritual guide. When I saw my spiritual guide, my heart witnessed that it was the same luminous face which I had seen in my dream in Bāb-ul-Madīnaĥ, Karachi, اَلْـحَمْـدُ لـِلّٰـه عَزَّوَجَلَّ.

Taṣawwur jamāūn to maujūd pāūn
Karūn band ānkĥayn to jalwaĥ numā ĥayn

اَلْـحَمْـدُ لـِلّٰـه عَزَّوَجَلَّ, I had stayed in Madīnaĥ Munawwaraĥ almost for two months. Over this period of time, I would attend Maḥfil-e-Na’at (Na’at reciting gathering), that used to be held at the blessed residence. I had the privilege to visit the blessed residence of Murshid many times in the evening. When the tormenting and heart-rending time of departing from Madīnaĥ came, I grew extremely sad. I start moving to the blessed court of the Beloved Prophet صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم to pay my farewell Salām in a state of immense grief. I was moving forward kissing the doors and walls and fruits and leaves down the street [with my eyes] visiting Madīnaĥ Munawwaraĥ like this and bless me with the burial in Jannat-ul-Baqī’ at the feet of my spiritual guide.

Raĥay ĥer sāl mayrā ānā jānā Yā Rasūlallāĥ

Baqī’-e-pāk mayn ĥo ākhir ṫĥikānā Yā Rasūlallāĥ

(Wasāil-e-Bakhshish, pp. 100)

صَلُّوۡا عَلَى الۡحَبِيۡب           صَلَّى اللّٰهُ تَعَالٰى عَلٰى مُحَمَّد

Dastār-Bandī (tying the turban) by Imām-e-Aĥl-e-Sunnat
Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ تَـعَـالٰی عَـلَيْـه was born in 1877      (1294 AH) at ‘Kalaswala’ of district Ziyākot (Sialkot is called ‘Ziyākot’ in relation to Ziyāuddīn in the Madanī environment of Dawat-e-Islami), Pakistan. He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه is lineal descendant of Sayyidunā Ṣiddīq-e-Akbar رَضِىَ اللهُ تَعَالٰی عَـنْهُ. He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه received his early education in Ziyākot (Sialkot), then for some time in Markaz-ul-Awliyā (Lahore) and Chokĥaṫ-e-Khuwājaĥ (Delhi). He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه, then, under the supervision of ‘Allāmaĥ Maulānā Waṣī Aḥmad Muḥaddiš Sūratī عَـلَيْهِ رَحْـمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ الـقَـوِی in Pilibhit (U.P. India) spent 4 years and acquired religious education.

After completing Daura-e-Ḥadīš, he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه received his degree. اَلْـحَمْـدُ لـِلّٰـه عَزَّوَجَلَّ, Imām-e-Aĥl-e-Sunnat رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه performed the Dastār-Bandī of Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه with his blessed hands. He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه also pledged allegiance/took Bay’at from Imām-e-Aĥl-e-Sunnat رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه and got the certificate of Khilāfat just at the age of eighteen.

Kalī ĥayn gulistān-e-Ghauš-ul-Warā kī

Yeĥ bāgh-e-Razā kay gul-e-khushnumā ĥayn

(Wasāil-e-Bakhshish, pp. 306)

From Bāb-ul-Madīnaĥ to Baghdad
In 1900, (1318 AH), when Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه was 24 years of age, he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه took leave of his Murshid Imām-e-Aĥl-e-Sunnat رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه and came to Bāb-ul-Madīnaĥ, Karachi. Having spent some time here, he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه went to Baghdad in order to get special blessings and favours from Sayyidunā Ghauš-e-A’ẓam عَـلَيْـهِ رَحْـمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ الۡاَکۡرَم. In Baghdad, he    رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه had been utterly absorbed into divine meditation for almost 4 years. He رَحْمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ تَـعَـالٰی عَـلَيْـه remained in the illuminated city of Baghdad approximately for 9 years and some months.

Visit of sacred Madīnaĥ
In 1327 AH (1910), Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه entered Madīnaĥ Ṭayyibaĥ following the route of Damascus (Syria)  by train. Turkish rulers used to ‘serve’ Madīnaĥ Ṭayyibaĥ in those days.

Gumbad-e-Khazrā pay Āqā jān mayrī qurbān ĥo

Mayrī dīrīnaĥ yeĥī ḥasrat Shāĥ-e-Abrār ĥay

Starved for seven days
Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه said, ‘When I arrived at Madīnaĥ, I experienced such a time that I had to starve for 7 days in the beginning. On the seventh day, when I got very weak due to hunger, a very dignified saint came to me and gave me three bags and left saying that he would bring some more things for me from the market. The first bag contained honey, second flour and the third one ghee. After some time, he brought me a packet of tea, sugar, etc., and returned immediately. I ran after him so that I could ask him the details, but he had disappeared. Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه was asked humbly about that person. He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه replied, ‘I presume that he might be the uncle of the Beloved Prophet صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم Sayyid-ush-Shuĥadā Sayyidunā Ḥamzaĥ رَضِىَ اللهُ تَعَالٰی عَـنْهُ because he رَضِىَ اللهُ تَعَالٰی عَـنْهُ has been entrusted with the Wilāyat (sainthood) of Madīnaĥ Munawwaraĥ.

Woĥ ‘ishq-e-ḥaqīqī kī lażżat naĥīn pā saktā

Jo ranj-o-muṣībat say dauchār naĥīn ĥotā

(Wasāil-e-Bakhshish, pp. 132)

Dear Islamic brothers! Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه had a great devotion to Sayyidunā Ḥamzaĥ رَضِىَ اللهُ تَعَالٰی عَـنْهُ. He would celebrate the ‘Urs of Sayyidunā Ḥamzaĥ رَضِىَ اللهُ تَعَالٰی عَـنْهُ every year on 17 Ramadan-ul-Mubārak and would break his one fast at the shrine of Sayyidunā Ḥamzaĥ رَضِىَ اللهُ تَعَالٰی عَـنْهُ.

You are welcome!
Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه was an eminent practicing scholar. Indeed, it was Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه who only could endure the severe hardships during the stay in Baghdad Ma’alā and while residing in Madīnaĥ Ṭayyibaĥ after leaving his hometown. He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه was extremely well-mannered and sociable. Whenever anyone would visit him, he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه would very often utter ‘Marḥabā Marḥabā’ loudly. اَلْـحَمْـدُ لـِلّٰـه عَزَّوَجَلَّ, likewise, when Sag-e-Madīnaĥ used to visit him, he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه would say ‘Marḥabā brother Ilyās! Marḥabā brother Ilyās!’ By doing this he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه would please me much. He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه was very hospitable and humble/meek. Sag-e-Madīnaĥ عُـفِیَ عَـنۡـهُ observed it repeatedly that whenever he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه was requested to make Du’ā, he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه would state, ‘I pray for you and request you to pray for me as well.’

Ziyā Pīr-o-Murshid mayray raĥnumā ĥayn

Surūr-e-dil-o-jān mayray dilrubā ĥayn

(Wasāil-e-Bakhshish, pp. 306)

Everyday Maḥfil-e-Mīlād
Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه had a deep devotion to the Beloved Prophet صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم. Here it would not be wrong to say that he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه was an ardent devotee of the Beloved Rasūl. Żikr-e-Rasūl صَلَّى الـلّٰـهُ تَـعَالٰى عَـلَيْهِ وَاٰلـِهٖ وَسَـلَّم was his consuming passion. He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه would frequently ask the pilgrims a question ‘Do you recite Na’at?’ If the pilgrim said ‘yes’, he, then, would listen to his Na’at and enjoy much. Many a time, tears streamed down his face due to being emotional. Maḥfil-e-Mīlād used to be held at his blessed residence daily throughout the year; pilgrims from Madīnaĥ, Turkey, Pakistan, India, Syria, Egypt, Africa, Sudan and from all over the world would attend it. اَلْـحَمْـدُ لـِلّٰـه عَزَّوَجَلَّ Sag-e-Madīnaĥ عُـفِیَ عَـنۡـهُ had the privilege to recite Na’at in this sacred Maḥfil (gathering) many times.

One thing that Sag-e-Madīnaĥ عُـفِیَ عَـنۡـهُ observed in the Maḥfil of Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ is that he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه did not use to lead Du’ā at the end of the Maḥfil showing humbleness, but rather asked any of the attendees to lead the Du’ā. Once or twice I was   also privileged to lead Du’ā in accordance with the saying:   ‘اَلۡاَمۡرُ فَوۡقَ الۡاَدَب’, that is to say, ‘the order is superior to respect’ to have the opportunity of leading the Du’ā at the end of the Maḥfil. Blessed Langer [food served to offer Īṣāl-e-Šawāb] used to be arranged daily after the Du’ā.’

Rātayn bĥī Madīnay kī bātayn bĥī Madīnay kī

Jīnay mayn yeĥ jīnā ĥay kyā bāt ĥay jīnay kī

No greed, no refusal, and no accumulation!
Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه was a noble-minded and noble-natured saint. He رَحْمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ تَـعَـالٰی عَـلَيْـه was very generous, affectionate and loving and would remind us of Salaf-e-Ṣāliḥīn (pious predecessors رَحِمَهُمُ الـلّٰـهُ تَـعَالٰی). He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه used to state, ‘No greed, no refusal, no accumulation.’ It implies that do not be greedy that someone will give you something and if someone gives you something without your asking, so do not refuse him, and when you take it, do not save it.

If someone presented him a perfume, he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه would    be pleased and make Du’a like this: عَطَّرَ اللّٰهُ اَيَّامَكُم, i.e., May Allah عَزَّوَجَلَّ make your days fragrant. He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه showed a deep devotion to the Beloved Prophet صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم and Sayyidunā Ghauš-e-A’ẓam عَـلَيْـهِ رَحْـمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ الۡاَ کۡرَم. Once he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه said, ‘Someone has said it beautifully’:

Ba’d-e-murdan rūḥ-o-tan is ṭaraḥ taqsīm ĥo

Rūḥ Ṭaybaĥ mayn raĥay lāshaĥ mayrā Baghdad mayn

Help from Ghauš-e-A’ẓam عَلَيۡهِ رَحۡمَةُ اللّٰهِ الۡاَكۡرَم
Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه said, ‘Once I suffered from paralysis that affected my half of the body. My illness was very severe, everyone thought that I would no longer survive. One night, I made a request to the Beloved Prophet صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم, weeping: Yā Rasūlallāĥ صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم! I have been sent to you by my Murshid Imām Aḥmad Razā Khān عَـلَيْهِ رَحْمَةُ الـرَّحْمٰن as a servant. If this illness is a punishment for any of my mistakes, please forgive me for the sake of my Murshid.

Likewise, I made a request to Sayyidunā Ghauš-e-Pāk and Khuwājaĥ Gharīb Nawāz رَحِمَهُمَا الـلّٰـهُ تَـعَالٰی. When I fell asleep, what I saw was that my Murshid A’lā Ḥaḍrat Imām Aḥmad Razā Khān عَـلَيْهِ رَحْمَةُ الـرَّحْمٰن came to me along with two luminous-faced saints. Pointing at one saint, A’lā Ḥaḍrat رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه said, ‘Ziyāuddīn! Look! He is Sayyidunā Ghauš-e-A’ẓam عَـلَيْـهِ رَحْـمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ الۡاَکۡرَم’, then pointing at the other saint, he رَحْمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ تَـعَـالٰی عَـلَيْـه said, ‘He is Sayyidunā Khuwājaĥ Gharīb Nawāz رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه.’ Sayyidunā Ghauš-e-A’ẓam عَـلَيْـهِ رَحْـمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ الۡاَکۡرَم moved his healing hand over my paralytic body and said, ‘Get up!’ I rose in my dream. Then these three saints رَحِمَهُمُ الـلّٰـهُ تَـعَالٰی started offering Ṣalāĥ. I woke up. اَلْـحَمْـدُ لـِلّٰـه عَزَّوَجَلَّ, I recovered.

May Allah عَزَّوَجَلَّ have mercy upon them and bless us for their sake!

Murshidī mujĥ ko banā day tū marīz-e-Mustafa

Az paey Aḥmad Razā Yā Ghauš-e-A’ẓam dastgīr

Help from Mustafa صَلَّی اللّٰہ تعالٰی علیہ واٰلہٖ وسلَّم
Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ تَـعَـالٰی عَـلَيْـه has stated: Many endeavours/efforts were made to expel me from Madīnaĥ (in the sacred crime of arranging Maḥfil-e-Mīlād[1]). However, when I would visit the blessed court of the Beloved Prophet  صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم and make my supplication so, somehow or the other, I would be able to remain in Madīnaĥ. Once the police threw my possession out of my home! I was standing in the street, worried. As the attention of the police diverted         I went anxiously to the blessed court of the Beloved Prophet صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم and submitted my request in tears. When I was a little relaxed, I returned to my street, and found that the police had themselves kept my possessions back in my house and I was informed that my exile-order from the city had been cancelled.

وَاللّٰه! Woĥ sun layn gey faryād ko puĥanchay gey

Itnā bĥī to ĥo koi jo āĥ! Karay dil say

(Ḥadāiq-e-Bakhshish)

Yā Rasūlallāĥ صَلَّی اللّٰہ تعالٰی علیہ واٰلہٖ وسلَّم! Where I have been trapped!
Undoubtedly, the Prophet of Raḥmaĥ, the Intercessor of Ummaĥ, the Owner of Jannaĥ صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم is always very kind to his guests. In 1400 AH, (1980) I (Sag-e-Madīnaĥ), for the first time, visited the sacred Madīnaĥ زَادَھَـا الـلّٰـهُ شَـرَفًـا وَّ تَـعۡـظِیۡـمًا. Perhaps it was the first or second night of the visit of Madīnaĥ زَادَھَـا الـلّٰـهُ شَـرَفًـا وَّ تَـعۡـظِیۡـمًا. Much part of the night had passed. I was enjoying the spiritual view of Gumbad-e-Khazrā outside Masjid-un-Nabawī near the door of Jibrāīl عَـلَيْـهِ الـسَّـلَام in a way that sometimes I would move forward devotedly towards Gumbad-e-Khazrā and sometimes I would move taking some steps backwards. After a while an on-duty policeman called me and grabbed me; his fellow policeman was dozing leaning against the wall. He kicked his fellow policeman and asked him to get up; his fellow policeman all at once aiming his gun at me stood in front of me! One policeman started pulling my ‘Zulfayn’ (Sunnaĥ-conforming long hair).

Perhaps the terrorists, who had seized Ka’baĥ and committed sacrilege to it a year or two years back causing acute agitation and grief among the Muslims of the entire world, had long hair and the police considered me their gang member.

They asked me to show them my passport, but unfortunately   I did not have my passport that time. It was at my residence.   I was, that time, in deep trouble. Both policemen took me to a small room; unlocked it and started pushing me inside it. Much part of the night had passed. I desperately needed to pass urine which worried me as to how I would be able to offer Ṣalāt-ul-Fajr after performing Ṭaĥārat (washing private parts) and Wuḍū inside that small room! I got confused and in the state of confusion, I spontaneously uttered some words of supplication in my own mother-tongue ‘Memoni’; the English translation of the words is: Yā Rasūlallāĥ صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم! Where I have been trapped!

I got further scared as I uttered ‘Yā Rasūlallāĥ صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم!’ Therefore I thought that they would torture me badly because unfortunately the governing class has no regard for those who utter ‘Yā Rasūlallāĥ صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم’, but what a favour bestowed upon me! As I uttered Yā Rasūlallāĥ صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم, the police started laughing after noticing my state of helplessness and nervousness. Then they released me and locked the door of the small room.

Jab tařap ker Yā Rasūlallāĥ kaĥā

Foran Āqā kī ḥimāyat mil gayī

(Wasāil-e-Bakhshish, pp. 115)

صَلُّوۡا عَلَى الۡحَبِيۡب           صَلَّى اللّٰهُ تَعَالٰى عَلٰى مُحَمَّد

Arrival of invisible (spiritual) personalities
Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ الـلّٰـهِ تَعَالٰی عَـلَيْه had been in a very strange state of mind two months before his demise. Whatever he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه said could not be understood. Sometimes, he  رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه said the following words repeatedly. ‘Your majesty, please come! Please come!’ Once, the audience saw him beseeching someone earnestly with both hands together, ‘Please forgive me; due to weakness I am unable to stand up for your reverence.’

After sometimes upon audience’s questioning, he رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه said, ‘Just now Sayyidunā Khiḍr عَـلٰى نَبِـيِّـنَا وَ عَـلَيْـهِ الـصَّلٰوة ُ وَالـسَّلَام, Sayyidunā Ghauš-e-A’ẓam رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه and my spiritual guide A’lā Ḥaḍrat Imām Aḥmad Razā Khān عَـلَيْهِ رَحْمَةُ الـرَّحْمٰن have visited me.’

Demise and blessed funeral
On Friday, 4th Żul-Ḥijja-til-Ḥarām, 1401 AH (02-10-81), as the Muażżin of Masjid-un-Nabawī uttered ‘اَللّٰهُ اَكۡبَرُ اَللّٰهُ اَكۡبَرُ’, Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه recited Kalimaĥ and then departed this world ‘اِنَّا لِلّٰهِ وَ اِنَّآ اِلَيۡهِ رٰجِعُوۡنَ’.

Having given a bath, shroud was spread and under the blessed head of Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه the sacred dust of the blessed Ḥujraĥ-e-Maqṣūraĥ of the Beloved and Blessed Prophet صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم was kept. The blessed Ghussālaĥ [the blessed water poured over the sacred grave] of the Beloved Prophet’s صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم luminous grave and many other sacred relics were also kept. Then the blessed shroud was tied. The blessed bier was lifted after Ṣalāt-ul-‘Aṣr in the echoes of Ṣalāt-‘Alan-Nabī صَلَّى اللهُ تَعَالٰى عَلَيْهِ وَاٰلِهٖ وَسَلَّم and Qaṣīdaĥ Burdaĥ.

‘Āshiq kā janāzaĥ ĥay żarā dĥūm say niklay

Maḥbūb kī galiyaun mayn żarā gĥūm kay niklay

Eventually, Sayyidī Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه, according    to his will, was buried in the presence of countless mourners at the place of Jannat-ul-Baqī’ where the Aĥl-e-Bayt-e-Aṭĥār رَضِىَ الـلّٰـهُ تَعَالٰی عَـنْهُم are resting. He رَحْمَةُ اللهِ تَعَالٰی عَلَيْه was buried just at a distance of two yards from the sacred shrine of Sayyida-tun-Nisā Fāṭima-tuz-Zaĥrā رَضِیَ الـلّٰـهُ تَـعَالٰی عَـنْـهَا.

May Allah عَزَّوَجَلَّ have mercy upon him and forgive us for his sake!

صَلُّوۡا عَلَى الۡحَبِيۡب           صَلَّى اللّٰهُ تَعَالٰى عَلٰى مُحَمَّد

Seven sayings of Quṭb-e-Madīnaĥ
1. One who does not follow Sharī’aĥ is not worthy of Tarīqaĥ.
2. Profound love for desires is a fatal companion and a bad habit is a great enemy.
3. It is the defect of one’s mind if he likes his own work.
4. Seek refuge of Allah عَزَّوَجَلَّ from the lust for wealth because one gains consciousness after it’s too late.
5. The world is a very bad place; one who falls into its trap once, he ensnared further and further into it, and one who gets away from it, it is after him.
6. The ability to perform a righteous deed is indeed a sign   of answering one’s prayers.
7. If someone’s letter is read or he is mentioned or his name is called in Madīnaĥ Munawwaraĥ زَادَھَـا الـلّٰـهُ شَـرَفًـا وَّ تَـعۡـظِیۡـمًا, so it is his good fortune!


